The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction today. Presented
by the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Crews, Daryl Lane, and David Carson.
The subject of this show is an interview with author James P. Hogan.
James P. Hogan is one of the very finest of the young science fiction writers
that began publishing in the 1970s. He has a strong background in electronics
and digital systems and a broad knowledge of science that is evident in all his
work. Some have called him the man who put science back in science fiction.
Hogan's forte is to set a novel in the near future, to create a bright,
scientifically oriented young man as the hero, and then to examine some theme
characteristic of science fiction. In Inherit the Stars and the Gentle Giants of
Ganymede, for instance, he treats first contact with an alien species. In Two
Faces of Tomorrow, he deals with artificial intelligence.
Hogan's stories are not only exciting narratives, but also stimulating and
thoughtful extrapolations on man's future.
How did you get interested in writing? It was too long ago to remember. When I
left school when I was 16 and wanted to be a writer then, I guess it was
something that I always enjoyed doing as a kid at school. You know, the essays
and the story writing exercises you get. And when I left school, I told the
world I was going to be a writer. And it seemed a good idea until somebody said,
well, with all the accumulated wisdom and experience of 16 years, what are you
going to write about that the world is breathlessly waiting to hear? And I
hadn't thought about that, and the answer was not a lot. So I went away into
engineering and electronics and computers and things like that for something
like 20 years. And I suppose the interest in writing probably never went away.
And 20-odd years later, that situation had changed a lot. I'd spent a lot of
that time. I started off as an electronics engineer and then a computer designer
and then went into selling computer systems. And not the blue boxes you see at
work that print out payrolls and things. I'm not talking about business
computers, but the real-time scientific systems that might go into scientific
research laboratories are connected up to instruments to collect all the data
and turn them into pictures on screens and the sort of computers you'd find in
particle accelerator installations or observatories. In other words, all my
customers were scientists, physicists, biologists, chemists, and so forth. And
the kinds of systems we're talking about ranged up to several million dollars.
And when somebody's buying a system of that size, it's not the kind of thing
that you sell in a one-half-hour sales call and, say, sign the paper. You're
frequently working with them for 12, maybe 18 months before a contract is
finalized. And during that time, you have to try and understand a lot of what
they're doing in terms of, to be able to put together and recommend the right
sort of system for their needs. And in other words, you get to know a little bit
of what they're all doing. And I found it fascinating. A fascinating world that
they lived in. Associating with the scientists as you were, I guess that gave
you a lot of the background material that you use in your stories. Yeah. Well,
that provided more the trigger.
The stimulation to take an interest in that kind of work, I guess reading
provided a lot of it. But that kind of material is easy to read when you have a
vested interest in understanding it because you have business relationships that
will profit from that understanding. In other words, it's reading with a
purpose, a clear-cut purpose rather than just out of curiosity or a way of
killing time. So luckily it became a little more than that. Most of your
stories, I guess, would be called hard science fiction. Yeah. Do you do a lot of
research whenever you do write a story? Yeah, I do.
I read quite a lot. And I suppose the bulk of my reading is non-fiction. So even
casual reading in a way becomes what might be termed non-specific research. In
other words, information that just gets stored away and comes out later,
although I didn't study it for any particular reason at the time. But while I
was, before I became a full-time writer, I was still working in the computer
business. I used to, I made use of my customers pretty freely as consultants,
which was kind of handy. I found that I had customers who were brain surgeons
and other customers who were studied pieces of rock brought back from the Apollo
missions and other guys who were building or investigating machine intelligence.
And just about any of the topics or the favorite themes of science fiction that
you could pick out of a hat, the chances were sort of not 10 to 1. I had a
customer specializing in that field and I just had to, if I needed some
background information on a particular topic, I could almost guarantee I had a
phone number in my diary of a guy who could talk all day about it. And they
loved doing it as well. I used to call them and they'd like to come and talk to
you tomorrow. Well, we're a little busy, but what's it about? Oh, I need some
help with the book I'm working on. Well, why didn't you say so? What time do you
want to show up? And they talk all day. And I think this is one of the
interesting sides of selling computers into this kind of area. You can imagine
some of these specialists, they talk to bacteria all day long or whatever and
they end up shut in the back rooms of universities. And maybe there are four
people on the planet they can talk to who understand their language. And
sometimes they find it hard to believe that somebody from the world outside that
has walked in off the street is sincerely interested to sit down and talk to
them and is curious. He wants to know what they're doing. He wants to have it
explained. And it was a very pleasant way to earn a living. You not only
gain customers, in many instances, I found you gain friends as well. Your first
novel, in fact, I believe it was the first thing that you wrote, was Inherit the
Stars, wasn't it? Yes, it was. It's a science fiction detective story. Yes. How
did you come to write that book? Well, I think that sums it up pretty well.
Well, it reflects, I think, the way I see science, which is, indeed, as a
wonderful, ongoing, never-ending detective story. And I suppose I got a little
bit dissatisfied with some of the depictions of science and scientists that I'd
seen in fiction. I formed the impression or the suspicion in some cases that
perhaps
the people who'd written some of the fiction, certainly, had perhaps not worked
in a scientific field or spoken to a scientist for a long, long time. And maybe
generations of people had reinforced each other's cliches. Scientists were
always eccentric and they wore odd-colored shoes and they drew cabbages that ate
people and they wanted to conquer the world or something. And there were these
kind of cute public impressions of scientists of people who run down the street
with no clothes on shouting, Eureka! you read phrases like, it came to him in a
flash and you read on and what came to him in a flash would have been enough to
keep Einstein busy for the next 20 years. And real science, you know, there are
insights, there are strokes of genius, but the overwhelming bulk of the work is
done by a lot of unsung heroes, a lot of people doing nothing really dramatic or
exciting, but just meticulously sifting through details and collecting
information for generations and for centuries all different parts of the world.
And it's really like putting together a huge jigsaw puzzle, lots of people
cutting out pieces and twisting them around and every now and again somebody
will take a huge chunk in this corner and see that it fits with a huge chunk
down there and that's a breakthrough. And so it goes on. And it really is a
detective story. I think it's a far more exciting one than most detective
fiction. And I wanted to write a story that attempted to depict it in this kind
of way and hopefully would convey some of the excitement that personally I feel
when I look at this whole thing. I thought that, yeah, let's make it a detective
story, but if we want a detective mystery that is going to be sufficiently
intriguing to motivate a large proportion of the scientific community as
happened in Inherit the Stars, we want something a little more original and
exciting than bodies in the library or footprints in the flower bed. So we
invented Charlie and the aliens and the rest I suppose you know. Basically it
was an attempt to depict science as it is or at least as I perceive it. And at
the same time weave that into a story that people who were non-scientists, non
-specialists would find stimulating and arousing for the curiosity even if, you
know, without trying to turn it into a 250-page lab report or something like
that. Yeah, I believe, I don't know if I'm reading this into your work or not,
but your writing is sort of almost a celebration of learning, you know, the
learning process. Yes. I think it's one of the most exciting processes anybody
can experience. I think it's very sad that in large sections of our culture we
should have evolved the attitude that learning is something you endure until you
leave school and then, you know, it ceases with adulthood. I think education and
living are just different aspects of the same process that never ends.
In the minds of a lot of people the two seem to have separated out and for some
reason learning is looked upon as hard work and unpleasant and something that
you steer clear of unless you can't avoid it. I think that's very, very sad. No
reason why it should be so. I think it's just a consequence of cultural
expectations. A lot of people expect it to be hard work and tedious and sure
enough it is. In your stories I've noticed that you really flesh out the futures
that you create with a lot of detail. Does that, that's simply to just make the
story more realistic. I was remembering one particular instance when Hunt is
traveling from England to the United States and he opens up his briefcase and
plugs in his video phone to the plane and makes this long distance call right
there. it seems so natural that
it just creates a very realistic atmosphere for your story. Yeah, I like to do
things like that. I think these kinds of details do matter because if we are
putting a story into a futuristic setting I think the little details of
background such as if the guy needs to make a phone tour how does he go about it
if he needs to rent a cab these matter because if the story is being told in the
future the whole of the background has to be consistently futuristic. I've come
across a number of instances which in my opinion are a little flawed because a
writer may have seized on a particular thought maybe a new scientific idea or a
machine or whatever develops that very well but kind of gets hung up on it and
in the background everything else that's going on hasn't changed since 1980
and trying to I think just stop typing for the five minutes it takes just to
think about a situation the guy's going to make a phone call just like stop and
think how he might make that and think about it for five minutes and then maybe
show it in a way different to what would have been the impulsive thing to do in
the first couple of seconds is worth the effort I don't think it radically
changes the story but it does give it that finishing polish as it were at least
in that sense and I try to do this in all the stories and I find that readers
like it I think I from the people who write to me and the people that I meet one
of the gratifying things I observe in the readership that I have is that very it
is not confined to what might be termed the hardcore science fiction reader who
buys anything new that appears on the science fiction section of the bookstores
but a lot of I suppose people who might be termed younger professional people in
their late 20s 30s 40s in all manner of professions not necessarily to do with
the sciences teachers lawyers doctors so forth who typically would say gee I
used to read science fiction when I was at college or when I was at university
but I kind of grew out of it I can't relate to way out galaxies like years away
anymore or aliens running around with ray guns today I have a family a career a
mortgage my feet are solidly on the surface of this planet but they seem to like
stories that don't kind of try and take them to the other side of the universe a
million years from now but maybe just stretch the future 20 or 30 years and they
find names in the book like IBM and Davis and Boeing familiar places and it kind
of grabs them I say well this I can relate to it's the world that I live in just
stretched a little bit the connection is not broken the economics and the
politics have evolved from what I read in the papers I can still see the
connections and it could be the world my kids grow up in and I like it and if it
has that effect on that far vast market of readership then I'm perfectly happy
to continue doing that in addition to the reason that I enjoy the stories better
myself for doing that I wouldn't be misreading in saying you're an optimistic
person would I? I think I am sure
why not I think there's enough doom and gloom around I try and contribute
something to counterbalance all that I think it's needed. You probably
would hold a great hope for the human potential then oh I think it's unlimited
it doesn't guarantee we'll
use it correctly and wisely at all there's no guarantee of that but I have no
doubt that the potential exists and the choice is entirely up to us and I think
that in itself is grounds for optimism it means that we're not pawns that are
pushed around by fate or magical mystical forces that we have no control over
our future I think that would be a very depressing thought I think it underlies
a lot of the philosophies that we hear expounded an excuse to quit trying to
write everything off as futile I don't subscribe to this at all I think that in
the same way that the individual future lies in his or her hands and I think
they have infinite potential to build upon if they have I think the only
resource that we're short of in some quarters is positive thinking and the right
attitude of mind nothing else and I think collectively the same is true I think
that there is a human tendency to be too conscious of our failings and our
faults and our mistakes which have happened it would be silly to deny that but I
think by and large we've achieved some remarkable and wonderful things as well
and continue to do so and I think when I look at the bottom line of the balance
sheet I'm pretty proud to be a member of the human race in your novel Thrice
Upon a Time you based the story around a device that can send messages back in
time to itself 24 hours in the past and then by that process just keep sending
it back to itself and back to itself I've been reading recently about several
scientists who are speculating about real possibilities of time travel was your
novel that your novel really was written before those came out and it's sort of
prophetic in a way maybe that's where they got it from
well I don't know whether it's prophetic or not as well as is elaborated in the
book itself if something like that ever became a fact there are some pretty
interesting problems that are going to have to be solved and our ideas of logic
and cause and effect are going to have to undergo some pretty interesting
revisions so I'm certainly not setting myself up as a prophet saying yes it'll
happen maybe I don't know I think history has shown that impossible or it'll
never happen are very dangerous phrases to use in any context as far as I was
concerned it was just a fun basis for a story certainly not an original one
although I did I was trying I don't suppose any of the things I've written about
have been original or in essence I'd try and approach them from hopefully fresh
and different angles but for some time for a number of years in fact before I
wrote Thrice Upon a Time I'd been wanting to write a time travel book for a
number of reasons firstly I wanted to attempt to face up to the paradoxes the
logical paradoxes once and for all and answer them without cop-outs without
convenient coincidences and without obliging characters who just happen to do
the right thing to make everything come out the way the author said
and secondly I wanted to I wanted to get away from this kind of cliche of some
kind of a conjurer's box described or disguised as whatever that you jump into
and you jump out of and you're in some other time we've seen too many conjurer's
boxes and it seemed to me unrealistic if I ever build a box like that and I
thought it was going to take me to another time I certainly wouldn't jump into
it and press the button I would conduct a long series of tests and experiments
first and none of our heroes ever seem to do this and it seemed to me reasonable
to say if we're going to make the speculation of influencing the past it seemed
to me to be reasonable to speculate that if we're going to make that assumption
anyway that before we move structured objects and people back into another time
we'd probably learn how to inject energy first and if you can send energy back
in time you can obviously switch the energy on and off and modulate it and send
information in other words you can send messages to yourself if you like I
didn't want it to be a million years or a billion years or some huge span of
time where really nothing that you did could make any difference how about a lab
bench experiment ten minutes you can just send a little signal back to yourself
ten minutes ago and change what you've already done this is interesting you're
hard up against the paradoxes now you can't duck a find a way around them or
duck them you've got to answer the question what happens the logic of it the
whole situation becomes absolutely it drives you to the point of insanity trying
to figure it out I found the only way to do it was to think in terms of the
simplest possible lab bench experiment that you could devise and strip away all
the complications to just get the logic right and then elaborate it back in up
to the level that would make a story interesting thing and the simplest
situation that you can think of is a button and a lamp and when you push the
button the lamp comes on couldn't get much simpler than that the only different
thing here is the lamp comes on ten seconds before you press the button because
the signal goes back in time so the question is obvious what happens I wait
until the lamp comes on ten seconds later it's time to press the button not
going to press it nobody could make me I didn't want mystical forces compelling
people to do something they didn't want to do
wanted to preserve human free will so what happens I don't press the button
conversely I can say well I did I the lamp didn't come on but I'm going to press
the button anyway just to hell of it what happened so those are two situations
one being the inverse of the other and if you can explain what happens you can
answer any time travel paradox because every one is an elaboration of one of
those situations or the other and it's not good enough to for example to wait
for the lamp to come on and you say I'm not going to press the button and you
fold your arms and sit there and just as the time is up the door opens and
somebody strolls in and says hey what's this and presses the button that doesn't
get you out of it because you're a scientist you're going to repeat your
experiment under conditions where that couldn't happen you'd lock the door and
set it up again you'd go out of the room and have the computer press the button
but eventually you would test it time and time and time again and if accidents
happen that got you out of a mess the first time you could eliminate them the
next time and eventually you have to face up to that question what happens
that's what I wanted to do and the first thing I wanted to do was to tell a
story in which the time machine itself and the staggering conceptual changes in
physics and philosophy that are implied are relevant to the story that's being
told there an integral part of it if you took them away there wouldn't be any
story I think in too many stories time machines are used like starships they're
just a device a vehicle to get some characters into an unusual environment and
then tell a pretty routine story that was stolen from Greek mythology or
European medieval history and the technology doesn't come into the story at all
they could have gone there on a greyhound bus I didn't want to do that and so
the story was about some physicists who had stumbled upon this phenomenon and
had realized that if what they were seeing meant what they thought it meant it
meant that they could actually inject information into the past and change the
past with all the questions that implies and being proceeded to test this
phenomenon and the pain some very very strange results and yet they're convinced
that behind all this there is some consistent system of super logic that does
make sense and they're trying to figure out the rules of it and of course
there's an unspoken or unwritten invitation for the reader to participate and
again I suppose it's a kind of a detective story not so much a whodunit but how
is it done to see if the reader can figure out the rules before the characters.
James Hogan's stories have explored several science fiction themes using
extrapolations of today's technology at times he paints a picture of the future
so real you can almost touch it this type of hands-on hardware science fiction
was very popular in the 50s and 60s and Hogan is helping to bring it back the
Inherit the Stars trilogy is not to be missed by anyone who is interested in
science fiction mysteries are the fascination of new technologies the third part
of the trilogy is entitled Giant Star and will be released in June.
This is David Crews, Daryl Lane, and David Carson. This has been the Science Fiction
Radio Show, a presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association in
conjunction with KOCV-FM and Odessa College, Odessa, Texas.